feat: add spec for namespace configs (#883)
ory/keto: docs/namespace_config_spec.md

# Namespace Configuration Language Specification

The Keto namespace configuration language is a syntactical subset of TypeScript.
Along with type definitions for the syntax elements of the language (such as

> `Namespace` or `Context`), the user can get context help from her IDE while

Author: Added, thanks!

writing the configuration.

## Notation

The syntax is specified using Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF):

```ebnf
Production  = production_name "=" [ Expression ] "." .
Expression  = Alternative { "|" Alternative } .
Alternative = Term { Term } .
Term        = production_name | token [ "…" token ] | Group | Option | Repetition .
Group       = "(" Expression ")" .
Option      = "[" Expression "]" .
Repetition  = "{" Expression "}" .
```

Productions are expressions constructed from terms and the following operators, in increasing precedence:

```ebnf
|   alternation
()  grouping
[]  option (0 or 1 times)
{}  repetition (0 to n times)
```

Lower-case production names are used to identify lexical tokens. Non-terminals are in CamelCase. Lexical tokens are enclosed in double quotes "" or back quotes ``.

The form `a … b` represents the set of characters from a through b as alternatives. The horizontal ellipsis `…` is also used elsewhere in the spec to informally denote various enumerations or code snippets that are not further specified.

## Configuraton text representation

The configuration is encoded in UTF-8.

## Lexical elements

### Comments

> 1. Line comments start with the character sequence // and stop at the end of the line.

Author: It was actually copied from the Go spec. I think we could reference many specs, as this is the commenting scheme for many langauges.

> 2. General comments start with the character sequence /* and stop with the first subsequent character sequence */.

Author: Yes, good idea!

### Identifiers

Identifiers name program entities such as variables and types. An identifier is a sequence of one or more letters and digits. The first character in an identifier must be a letter.

```ebnf
identifier = letter { letter | digit } .
digit      = "0" … "9"
letter     = "A" … "Z" | "a" … "z" | "-" | "_"
```

### Keywords

The configuration language has the following keywords:

* `class`
* `implements`
* `metadata`
* `relations`
* `permissions`
* `this`
* `ctx`

> * `id`

Author: Eventually these will be added. None are part of the language right now, and I'd like to implement the simplest thing first and then expand from there.

### Builtin Types

The following types are built in:

* `Context`
* `Namespace`
* `Array<Namespace>` or `Namespace[]`

> * boolean

Author: Good catch!

> In TypeScript, they would be defined as follows:

Author: Keto Schema Language?

```typescript
type Context = { subject: never }

interface Namespace {
    metadata: { id: number }
    relations?: { [relation: string]: Namespace[] }
    permissions?: { [method: string]: (ctx: Context) => boolean }
}

interface Array<Namespace> {
  includes(searchElement: Namespace): boolean;
  some(callbackfn: (value: Namespace) => boolean): boolean;
}
```

### Operators

The following character sequences represent boolean operators:

| Operator | Signature | Semantic |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `&&` | *x* `&&` *y* | true iff. *x* and *y* are true |
| `\|\|` | *x* `\|\|` *y* | true iff. *x* or *y* are true |
| `==` | *x* `==` *y* | true iff. *x* equals *y* |

> | `!=` | *x* `!=` *y* | ture iff. *x* does not equal *y* |

Reviewer: I think kevgo has a point here. Novice JS users will probably not care about this, but experienced devs will for sure ask themselves what this means and might also be confused as to why `===` is not working. We should also explain what `equal` means here?

> | `!=` | *x* `!=` *y* | ture iff. *x* does not equal *y* |

Reviewer 2: I agree that `===` is clunky and the whole situation is far from ideal. Here are a few things that I think we should keep in mind. 

The `==` operator has [very well defined behavior](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Equality) in JS. If we use `==` in our language, we have to remove the parts from its spec where it tries to convert the operands into types that are comparable. Technically, this is within our mission of definining a "subset" of TypeScript. 

I am concerned that removing elements from the spec of `==` effectively changes its behavior. This will confuse humans who likely expect a subset where the parts left in the language are "normal" JS. The TS tooling we plan on using (type checker, linter, unit tests running in Node) will always assume the JS behavior. I want to avoid situations where the behavior of a Keto spec is different in tests than when running inside Keto. So I guess I propose that we at least test this before finalizing this spec.

For reference, the `===` operator, while uglier, [already does what we want](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Strict_equality). Unless "equality" means something completely different in Keto than it does in JS. Is that the case here?

> | `!=` | *x* `!=` *y* | ture iff. *x* does not equal *y* |

Author: OK this makes sense. Then we will *only* support the `===` and `!==` operators, as this captures best the semantics of the rules in intersection with the semantics of JS.

> | `!=` | *x* `!=` *y* | ture iff. *x* does not equal *y* |

Author: On second thought, since we right now in the spec only allow relations with type `T[]`, checks for equality are actually done implicitly via `includes`. This means we can take direct equality out of the spec for now.

> | `!=` | *x* `!=` *y* | ture iff. *x* does not equal *y* |

Reviewer: > OK this makes sense. Then we will _only_ support the `===` and `!==` operators, as this captures best the semantics of the rules in intersection with the semantics of JS.

I agree with this

> On second thought, since we right now in the spec only allow relations with type `T[]`, checks for equality are actually done implicitly via `includes`. This means we can take direct equality out of the spec for now.

True, none of the examples actually use an equality operator. Are there use cases where this is needed actually?

The following character sequences represent miscelanious operators:

| Operator | Example | Semantic |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `(`, `)` | `x()` | call function `x` |
| `[`, `]` | `T[]` | `T` is an array type |
| `{`, `}` | `class x {}` | Scope delimiters |

> | `=>` | `list.some(el => f(el))` | Lambda definition token. |

Author: Yes, let's leave it out of v1 of the spec.

*viewers*, both of which have *users* as subjects. Additionally, the relation
*parent* has type *Document*.
```typescript
type User { metadata = { id: 1 } }

type Document {
  metadata = { id: 2 }
  relations = {
    parent: Document[]
    owners: User[]
    viewers: User[]
  }
}
```

### Permission definition

Again inside the class declarations, the permissions are defined as functions
that thake a `ctx` of type `Context` and evaluate to a boolean `true` or
`false`.

```ebnf
PermissionDefns = "permissions" "=" "{" Permission [ "," Permission ] "}" .
Permission      = PermissionSign "=>" PermissionBody .
PermissionSign  = PermissionName ":" "(" "ctx" [ ":" "Context" ] ")" [ ":" "boolean" ] .
PermissionName  = identifier .
```

The `ctx` object is a fixed parameter that contains the `subject` for which the
permission check should be conducted:
```typescript
ctx = {subject: "some_user_id"}
```
In the future, more context fields could be added here, e.g., the IP range or
geolocation, the time of day, or the security level of the device making the
request.

```ebnf
PermissionBody  = PermissionCheck | { Operator PermissionCheck } .

> Operator        = "||" | "&&" .

Author: Negation does not map to Zanzibar concepts. We can extend them later and add it to the spec.

PermissionCheck = TransitiveCheck | IncludesCheck .
```

The body of a permission check is either one of

* a `IncludesCheck`, a check that something is in a set, e.g., `this.relations.viewers.includes(ctx.subject)`:
```ebnf
IncludesCheck   = "this" "." "relations" "." RelationName "." "includes" "(" "ctx" "." "subject" ")" .
```
* a `TranstitiveCheck`, a call to a permission on a relation, e.g., `this.relations.parents.some(p => p.permissions.view(ctx))`:
```ebnf

> TransitiveCheck = "this" "." "relations" "." RelationName "." "some" "(" Var "=>" PermissionCall ")" .

Author: We decided to leave this out of the first version, since that semantic does not translate to Zanzibar concepts yet (Zanzibar has no set intersection for rewrites). For top-level intersection / every / and, you can use `&&`.

PermissionCall  = Var "." "permissions" "." PermissionName "(" "ctx" ")" .
Var             = identifier .
```

#### Implementation note
`IncludeCheck` and `TransitiveCheck` will be translated to Zanzibar concepts as
follows:

| Keto Config | Zanzibar AST |
| --- | --- |
| `this.relations.<R>.includes(ctx.subject)` | `computed_userset { relation: "<R>" } }` |
| `this.relations.<R>.some(x => x.permissions.<P>(ctx.subject))` | `tuple_to_userset { tupleset { relation: "<R>" } computed_userset { relation: "<P>" } }` |

## Examples

The config can be typechecked by TypeScript with the `noLib` option (preventing

> the standard globals) and supplying the following globals instead:

Author: I clarified this. Regarding tooling, we will probably ship a TypeScript config that works best for writing the Keto config. I just need to research the best way to do it.

```typescript
type Context = { subject: never }

interface Namespace {
    metadata: { id: number }
    relations?: { [relation: string]: Namespace[] }
    permissions?: { [method: string]: (ctx: Context) => boolean }
}

interface Array<Namespace> {

>   includes(searchElement: Namespace): boolean;

Author: Right!

  some(callbackfn: (value: Namespace) => boolean): boolean;
}
```

Then the config reads as follows (note that `metadata` is now mandatory, and

> that only the specified array methods can be used, etc.):

Author: What I meant to say is you get a type error in TypeScript if you miss `metadata`, since it then no longer implements `Namespace`.

```typescript
class User implements Namespace {
  metadata = {
      id: 1
  }
}

class File implements Namespace {
  metadata = {
      id: 2
  }

  relations: {
    parents: File[]
    viewers: User[]
    owners: User[]
    siblings: File[]
  }

  permissions = {

>     isViewer: (ctx: Context) => this.relations.viewers.includes(ctx.subject),

Author: Good catch! I think we should pick (b) and take it out of the examples. Probably real helper methods would then be methods directly on the class, or functions as you suggested in (c).

> # The "Keto Schema Language" Specification

Reviewer: See comment below

Enforcing fine-grained permissions is a critical building block of mature
technology solutions that protect privacy and identity in the information age. A
number of proprietary languages to represent permission already exists, namely
the [Authzed Schema Language](https://docs.authzed.com/reference/schema-lang)
and [Auth0 FGA](https://docs.fga.dev/). Many permissions are defined by normal
developers who typically are most familiar with web technologies like JavaScript
or Typescript. We therefore see the need for a developer-friendly configuration
language for permissions that has such a small learning curve that it can be
picked up, used, and understood with confidence by most developers. We therefore
chose to define our permissions configuration language as a subset of the most
common general-purpose programming language: JavaScript/TypeScript.

> The Keto Schema Language is a syntactical subset of TypeScript. Along with type

Reviewer: I would almost prefer to give this a unique name, like "Ory Session Token", or "Ory Identity Schema":

```suggestion
The Ory Permission Schema Language is a syntactical subset of TypeScript. Along with type
```

definitions for the syntax elements of the language (such as `Namespace` or
`Context`), users can get context help from their IDE while writing the
configuration.

## Notation

The syntax is specified using Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF):

```ebnf

> Production  = production_name "=" [ Expression ] "." .

Reviewer: Is `Production` common practice wording?

Author: Yes, this section is borrowed from the Go language spec.

Author: We could just remove this section completely and reference the Go spec. WDYT?

Reviewer: In that case I think this is fine :) This probably will never change!

Expression  = Alternative { "|" Alternative } .
Alternative = Term { Term } .
Term        = production_name | token [ "…" token ] | Group | Option | Repetition .
Group       = "(" Expression ")" .
Option      = "[" Expression "]" .
Repetition  = "{" Expression "}" .
```

Productions are expressions constructed from terms and the following operators,
in increasing precedence:

```ebnf
|   alternation
()  grouping
[]  option (0 or 1 times)
{}  repetition (0 to n times)
```

Lower-case production names are used to identify lexical tokens. Non-terminals

> are in CamelCase. Lexical tokens are enclosed in double quotes "".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are in CamelCase. Lexical tokens are enclosed in double quotes `""`.
```

The form `a … b` represents the set of characters from a through b as
alternatives. The horizontal ellipsis `…` is also used elsewhere in the spec to
informally denote various enumerations or code snippets that are not further
specified.

## Configuraton text representation

The configuration is encoded in UTF-8.

## Lexical elements

### Comments

1. Line comments start with the character sequence // and stop at the end of the
   line.
2. General comments start with the character sequence /* and stop with the first
   subsequent character sequence */.
3. Documentation comments start with the character sequence /** and stop with
   the first subsequent character sequence */.

### Identifiers

Identifiers name program entities such as variables and types. An identifier is
a sequence of one or more letters and digits. The first character in an
identifier must be a letter.

```ebnf
identifier = letter { letter | digit } .
digit      = "0" … "9"

> letter     = "A" … "Z" | "a" … "z" | "-" | "_"

Reviewer: Are identifiers things like variables? If so, can we really use `-`?

```
// This would not compile in TS:
var foo-bar
```

Reviewer 2: Good point, let's stick with the [JS syntax for identifiers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Identifier): unicode letters, $, _, and digits (0-9).

Author: Yes, I noticed that as well. Thanks!

```

### Keywords

The configuration language has the following keywords:

* `class`
* `implements`
* `metadata`
* `related`
* `permits`
* `this`
* `ctx`
* `id`

### Builtin Types

The following types are built in:

* `Context`
* `Namespace`

> * `Array<Namespace>` or `Namespace[]`

Author: Agreed!

* `boolean`
* `number`

In TypeScript, they would be defined as follows:

```typescript
type Context = { subject: never }

interface Namespace {

>     metadata: { id: number }

Author: That makes sense, but will trigger some internal work in creating the mapping table you mentioned. @zepatrik FYI.

PermissionCall  = Var "." "permits" "." PermissionName "(" "ctx" ")" .
Var             = identifier .
```

#### Implementation note
`IncludeCheck` and `TransitiveCheck` will be translated to Zanzibar concepts as
follows:

| Keto Config | Zanzibar AST |
| --- | --- |
| `this.related.<R>.includes(ctx.subject)` | `computed_userset { relation: "<R>" } }` |
| `this.related.<R>.some(x => x.permits.<P>(ctx.subject))` | `tuple_to_userset { tupleset { relation: "<R>" } computed_userset { relation: "<P>" } }` |

## Examples

The config can be typechecked in `strict` mode by TypeScript with the `noLib`
option (preventing the standard globals), the `strictPropertyInitialization`
option (allowing uninitialized properties) and supplying the following globals
instead:

```typescript
type Context = { subject: never }

interface Namespace {
    metadata: { id: number }
    related?: { [relation: string]: Namespace[] }
    permits?: { [method: string]: (ctx: Context) => boolean }
}

interface Array<Namespace> {
  includes(element: Namespace): boolean;
  some(callbackfn: (value: Namespace) => boolean): boolean;

> }

Reviewer 2: This part is already listed in identical form on lines 105-116. Can we remove one of them?

Author: yes

> # The "Ory Permission Language" Specification

Reviewer: Naming wise it is important to have Ory in it. Keto might be renamed to Ory Permission Service at some point and it should fit in the other terminology we have (Ory Session, Ory Identity Schema, …)

> # The "Ory Permission Language" Specification

Reviewer: Let's go with Ory Permission Language. Noone really writes OPL any more, it should be fine

> # The "Ory Permission Language" Specification

Reviewer 2: Good points. IBM also has an [Optimization Programming Language](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/icos/20.1.0?topic=opl-optimization-programming-language) that still seems active. Maybe we go with "Ory Permission Format" (OPF) or "Ory Permission Grammar" (OPG)? That's also better googleable.

We chose TypeScript mostly because it's popular. In the future, we might support additional programming languages since not everybody likes, wants, or uses TypeScript (and the language has so many warts). So, maybe we encode the language used in the name of the config format?

- OP-TS or OPTS: Ory Permissions as TypeScript
- OP-GO or OPGO: Ory Permissions as Go
- OP-RS or OPRS: Ory Permissions as Rust
- OP-RB or OPRB: Ory Permissions as Ruby
- OP-PY or OPPY: Ory Permissions as Python

The form `a … b` represents the set of characters from a through b as
alternatives. The horizontal ellipsis `…` is also used elsewhere in the spec to
informally denote various enumerations or code snippets that are not further
specified.

## Configuraton text representation

The configuration is encoded in UTF-8.

## Lexical elements

### Comments

1. Line comments start with the character sequence // and stop at the end of the
   line.
2. General comments start with the character sequence /* and stop with the first
   subsequent character sequence */.
3. Documentation comments start with the character sequence /** and stop with
   the first subsequent character sequence */.

### Identifiers

Identifiers name program entities such as variables and types. An identifier is
a sequence of one or more letters and digits. The first character in an
identifier must be a letter.

```ebnf
identifier = letter { letter | digit } .
digit      = "0" … "9" .
letter     = "A" … "Z" | "a" … "z" | "_" .
```

### String literals

String literals represent string constants as sequences of characters.

```ebnf
string_lit    = single_quoted | double_quoted .

> single_quoted = "'" { letter | digit } "'" .

Author: Typescript has single quotes as well; and from the implementation aspect the effort is negligible.

> single_quoted = "'" { letter | digit } "'" .

Reviewer 2: Please keep in mind that both string types have slightly different parsing rules. For example, double-quoted strings don't require escaping single quotes and it's the opposite for single-quoted strings. 

If the goal is to support all string types that TypeScript supports, we might also want to support [template strings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) (strings in backticks). This string type supports interpolation and multilines.

double_quoted = '"' { letter | digit } '"' .
```

### Keywords

The configuration language has the following keywords:

* `class`
* `implements`
* `metadata`
* `related`

> * `permits`

Author: I don't think it makes much difference for the user, but for the parser I found it convenient to have these as keywords. Removing keywords is always backwards-compatible, so we can demote e.g. `metadata` to an identifier later.

* `this`
* `ctx`
* `id`

### Builtin Types

The following types are built in:

* `Context`
* `Namespace`
* `Namespace[]`
* `boolean`
* `string`

In TypeScript, they would be defined as follows:

```typescript
type Context = { subject: never }

interface Namespace {
    metadata: { id: string }
    related?: { [relation: string]: Namespace[] }
    permits?: { [method: string]: (ctx: Context) => boolean }
}

> interface Array<Namespace> {

Author: The type definition is not part of the configuration language, it is just part of the tooling. We never have to parse the type definitions. Therefore, we can still use the `Array<...>` syntax here, since this is part of TypeScript.

>   includes(searchElement: Namespace): boolean;

Author: I don't care much about the spelling, but I took it from the MDN docs and the TypeScript type implementation, see https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/includes.

  some(iteratorfn: (element: Namespace) => boolean): boolean;
}
```

### Operators

The following character sequences represent boolean operators:

| Operator | Signature | Semantic |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `&&` | *x* `&&` *y* | true iff. *x* and *y* are true |

> | `\|\|` | *x* `\|\|` *y* | true iff. *x* or *y* are true |

Author: Agreed. Currently the language only allows these operators in very few places (when comapring bools).

> | `\|\|` | *x* `\|\|` *y* | true iff. *x* or *y* are true |

Reviewer 2: What about my suggestion from above, which "both" and "either" to make the difference between logical boolean operators from the common usage in English more clear?

The following character sequences represent miscellaneous operators:

| Operator | Example | Semantic |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `(`, `)` | `x()` | call function `x` |

> | `[`, `]` | `T[]` | `T` is an array type |

Author: Yes, thanks!

## Statements

### Type declaration

The top level of the configuration consists of a list of `class` declaration for
each namespace. Each `class` consists of relation declarations and permission
declarations.

```ebnf
Config          = [ ClassDecl ] .
ClassDecl       = "class" identifier "implements" "Namespace" "{" ClassSpec "}" .
ClassSpec       = MetadataDefn | [ RelationDecls ] | [ PermissionDefns] .
```

#### Example

The following declares a type *User* that is never the object in any
relation. It can, however, be the subject of a relation, the relation being
declared on some other type.

```ts
class User implements Namespace { 
  metadata = { 
    id: "1"
  }
}
```

### Metadata definiton

The namespace metadata is defined through an object property of the class.
Currently, there is only the `id` metadata field, which specifies the unique identifier for the namespace.
This way, namespaces can be renamed without needing to update the underlying relation tuples.

```ebnf
MetadataDefn   = "metadata" "=" "{" id ":" string_lit "}" .
```

### Relation declaration

Inside the class declaration, relations are declared. `RelationName` must be

> unique identifiers and are used as the relation strings in the tuples. The

Author: Here, `RelationName` refers to "owners", not "core.User[]". The relations in Keto are global identifiers, meaning they have no namespace.

Namespaces can be scoped as you suggested, but I would like to keep a module system out of the first version of the spec.

`TypeName` must be the name of a `type` that is defined above or below (in
TypeScript: a class that implements `Namespace`).

```ebnf
RelationDecls   = "related" "=" "{" { RelationName ":" TypeName "[]" } "}" .
RelationName    = literal .
TypeName        = literal .
```

Note that all relations are defined as array types `T[]`, because there are
naturally only many-to-many relations in Keto.

The following declares a type *Document* with three relations: *owners* and

> *viewers*, both of which have *users* as subjects. Additionally, the relation

Reviewer 3: It is the other way around in your example. This is one huge topic that everyone gets wrong at some point. That's why we think the object-oriented style of this schema language will help, but apparently there are still confusions :sweat_smile:

> *viewers*, both of which have *users* as subjects. Additionally, the relation

Reviewer 2: @zepatrik I don't follow, can you please elaborate which of my two examples you refer to and what you see as the right way of reading this? TBH I can think of a whole number of ways of reading this. My examples assume this order in the document:

```ts
class Document { permits: { view: (ctx: Context) => this.owners.includes(ctx.subject) } }
```

1. right-middle-left: "Only owners can view documents"
2. left-middle-right: "Documents can only be viewed by their owners"
3. middle-left-right: "You can only view documents that you own."

If this is a huge topic that everyone gets wrong at some point, this document should define the idiomatic way of reading rules in our format and provide guidance and examples.

I also think if we can do better than the Google recommendation of reading right-to-left, that's another big advantage for us. 

I find (3) the most intuitive, then (2), then (1). I like that (2) follows the natural reading direction and the way I think about OO code. Hence my recommendation is for (2). What do you think?

> *viewers*, both of which have *users* as subjects. Additionally, the relation

Reviewer 2: The spec currently refers to "subjects" (on line 169 and 208) and "objects" (on line 168) of relations. I think the spec should either define these terms or remove them.

*parent* has type *Document*.
```ts
class User {
  metadata = {
    id: "1"
  }
}

class Document {
  metadata = {
    id: "2"
  }
  related = {

>     parent: Document[]

Author: Yes, this is more correct. We can't specify that we want only one, or exactly one parent in Keto, since there are always just relation tuples in the database (at least these constraints would involve fundamental changes to the data store).

We should encourage users to always pluralize their relations, as already suggested by the now-mandatory array type.

Repetition  = "{" Expression "}" .
```

Productions are expressions constructed from terms and the following operators, in increasing precedence:

```ebnf
|   alternation
()  grouping
[]  option (0 or 1 times)
{}  repetition (0 to n times)
```

Lower-case production names are used to identify lexical tokens. Non-terminals are in CamelCase. Lexical tokens are enclosed in double quotes "" or back quotes ``.

The form `a … b` represents the set of characters from a through b as alternatives. The horizontal ellipsis `…` is also used elsewhere in the spec to informally denote various enumerations or code snippets that are not further specified.

## Configuraton text representation

The configuration is encoded in UTF-8.

## Lexical elements

### Comments

1. Line comments start with the character sequence // and stop at the end of the line.
2. General comments start with the character sequence /* and stop with the first subsequent character sequence */.

### Identifiers

Identifiers name program entities such as variables and types. An identifier is a sequence of one or more letters and digits. The first character in an identifier must be a letter.

```ebnf

> identifier = letter { letter | unicode_digit } .

Reviewer 3: We need to define letters here, I assume unicode? What about `-` and `_`?
